Hello friends
In this video we're going to discuss about the octal number system
So in the previous video we learnt the binary number system
But it is very hard to deal with binary numbers
because everything will be in zeros and ones
to reduce the complexity we have the Octal number system
in which we will group every three bits of binary in right to left direction
The maximum value that can be formed using three bits is 7
that is 111 in binary
It is also called Base 8 number system
and it has the numbers from 0 to 7
That is 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 and 7
Now see the possible three bit group combinations
we have 000 and its corresponding octal value is 0
And for 001 it's octal value  is 1
and for 010 it's octal value is 2
and for 011 its octal value is 3
And for 100 the octal value is 4
and for 101 the octal value is 5
and for 110 the corresponding octal value is 6
and finally for 111 it is 7
We have to byheart these values and it will be very helpful
Knowing these eight values, one can convert any large value to octal and from octal
So how to convert a binary value to its octal value ?
Let us understand it using an example.
Let us convert the binary value 101100 to the octal number system
So as we discussed before, in the Octal number system
we will group every three bits from right to left
So starting from the right end take the first three bits and group them
So we got the first group 100
Now take the next three bits and group it
So we got 101
Now let us write the corresponding octal values
for 100 it is 4 and for 101 it is 5
So we got the corresponding Octal value 54
So 101100 to the base 2 is equivalent to 54 to the base 8.
Now see another example we have 01100
So to convert this binary value into its Octal value
take the three bits from right end
So we got 100
Now take the next three bits
But there are only two bits left
and we can make only three bit groups
So what to do?
in such cases we have to add zeroes to the left to make it three bit group.
So add a zero before 01. So we got 001.
Similarly if we had only one bit left
we can add two zeros to the left to make it a three bit group
So here we got two groups 100 and 001
Now taking the corresponding octal values
we get for 100 it is 4 and for 001 it is 1.
So the octal value corresponding to the binary 01100 is 14
Now how to convert Octal number into its binary value?
It is a very easy method
So to convert an octal number to it's binary
We need to represent every digit of octal number in its three bit binary form
See an example
We have the Octal number 57
To convert this into binary
write the three bit binary value of each digit.
So  for 5 it is 101 and  for 7 it is 111
Now write these values together and this is the corresponding binary of octal 57
So today we discussed about octal number system or base 8 number system
In octal system we will group every three bits of binary
in the right to left direction
We learnt how to convert binary to  octal.
just group the bits in size of 3 from right to left direction
and write the corresponding octal values of each group
We also learned that if the number of bits is not a multiple of three
add the required number of zeros before the binary number
to make it a perfect three bit group
and to convert octal to binary
simply write the three bit binary value of each digit and join them
So it is very clear that if you know the eight different combinations
and its corresponding octal values you can convert any binary to octal and any octal to binary
So that's all
And in the next video we will discuss about the hexa decimal number system
So that's all for this video and thank you for watching.